## [Class Exercise](https://aselshall.github.io/rm/m06/exercise)

Read and evaluate abstract A and B on a scale from 0 to 10.  
Discuss with your classmate the pros and cons of each abstract.   
Present an argument to the class justifying the abstract that you like more.  

## Abstract A

**Concentration, spatial distribution, and uncertainty analysis of health risk assessment of aluminum in Shiraz's drinking water distribution network in winter and summer**

The concentration of aluminum (Al) can increase in water naturally due to mobilization of aluminum from natural sources, and anthropogenically due to the non-optimal use of aluminum sulfate in coagulation and flocculation, and near mining sites. Based on the toxic effects of aluminum on the human body, the objectives of this study are to measure the concentration and assess the health risk of aluminum in the drinking water in Shiraz, Iran, for children, adolescents, and adults in winter and summer seasons. With optimized sampling points, 90 water samples were taken from the drinking water distribution system of Shiraz, and the concentration of Al was measured by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS). The mean ±standard deviation concentration of Al in the drinking water in Shiraz in winter and summer are 3.07±3.03 and 9.07±2.73 parts per billion (ppb), respectively. The results of the health risk assessment based on the deterministic method of Al in drinking water show that the highest hazard quotient (HQ) of 0.00221 is for children in summer, and the lowest HQ of 0.00000 is for adolescents and adults in winter. HQ of less than one suggests a non-cancerous health impacts on humans. Additionally, we conducted Monte Carlo simulation to access parametric uncertainty and Sobol sensitivity analysis to identify sensitive parameters. The HQ95 in Monte Carlo simulation for children, adolescents, and adults is 0.00280, 0.00081, and 0.00050, respectively, indicating higher health risk for younger age groups. The most important parameters based on Sobol sensitivity analysis are the pollutant concentration in adolescent and adult groups and the ingestion rate in children. Moreover, we investigated the interaction effects between pollutant concentration with ingestion rate (C-IR) and with body weight (C-BW) for the three age groups. None of the samples exceeded the World Health Organization (WHO) limit of 0.2 mg/l. However, due to the fact that Shiraz's drinking water treatment plant uses Al as a coagulant, regular monitoring and optimal operation of the coagulation and flocculation processes are essential.

**Keywords:** Health risk assessment, Sobol Sensitivity analysis, Aluminum, Drinking water, GIS.

## Abstract B

**Probabilistic human health risk assessment and Sobol sensitivity analysis reveal that aluminum in drinking water poses higher risk for children in summer in Shiraz, Iran due to ingestion**

Alzheimer Disease increase can be attributed to the presence of aluminum (Al) in drinking water. Overuse of aluminum salts (a.k.a., alum) in coagulation and flocculation processes in water treatment raises concerns about increased levels of Al in drinking water.  In this study, we present a probabilistic human health risk assessment (HRA) for non-cancerogenic risks, with Sobol sensitivity analysis, to vet the concern of increased health risk from Al in drinking water in Shiraz, Iran for children, adolescents, and adults.  We collected 90 water samples in the winter and summer, and measured the Al concentrations using atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS). The parameters of the HRA are the Al concentration, ingestion rate, exposure frequency, exposure duration, and body weight. The results show that the concentration of Al in the drinking water in Shiraz varies significantly between winter and summer seasons, and varies considerably spatially across the city irrespective of the season. Yet all concentrations are below the guideline concentration. The HRA results show that the highest health risk is for children in summer, and the lowest is for adolescents and adults in winter, with generally higher health risks for younger age groups. However, Monte Carlo results for all age groups suggest no adverse health effects due to Al exposure. The sensitivity analysis shows that the sensitive parameters varies across age groups. For example, the Al concentration, and ingestion rate pose the most risk for adolescent and adult groups, and children group, respectively. More importantly the interaction of Al concentration with ingestion rate and body weight are the controlling parameters for evaluating HRA instead of Al concentration alone.  We conclude that while HRA of Al in Shiraz drinking water did not indicate a significant health risk, regular monitoring and optimal operation of the coagulation and flocculation processes are essential.  The presented method is straightforward and can be applied at other contaminants and locations.

**Keywords:** Water quality, Aluminum, Drinking water, Health risk assessment, Sobol sensitivity analysis, Monte Carlo uncertainty analysis.
