## Nature-based infrastructure for enhancing climate resiliency of groundwater resources in South Florida: An integrated modeling approach.

Faulty member: Ahmed S. Elshall and Seneshaw Tsegaye   
Funding: EPA-I-R4-SFL-2023-01; 2023 South Florida Program


### Project Summary
This project aligns with the call for proposal "Addressing Climate Resiliency through Nature Based Infrastructure" by addressing the impacts of climate change on groundwater resources and promoting resilience in South Florida. The project aims to utilize an integrated modeling approach to evaluate and implement nature-based infrastructure features (NBIFs) that mitigate the effects of climate change on groundwater resources.  
  
The project focuses on addressing the challenges of sea-level rise, changing precipitation patterns, and rapid socioeconomic development, which pose threats to groundwater and community resilience in South Florida. By collaborating with stakeholders and leveraging the expertise of the South Florida Water Management District (SFWMD) and extension specialists, the project intends to assess the effectiveness of NBIFs in enhancing groundwater recharge and maintaining ecosystem functions.  
  
The proposed integrated modeling approach involves the utilization of the USGS Biscayne and Southern Everglades Coastal Transport (BISECT) model, which couples surface water-groundwater density dependent flow, to simulate the water-ecology-human system in South Florida. Through this modeling framework, the project aims to quantify groundwater availability and usability, spring discharge, and submarine groundwater discharge under current and future climate scenarios and groundwater management strategies identified by SFWMD. The project's major objectives and outputs include:
- Quantifying the impacts of current and future climate scenarios and groundwater management strategies on groundwater resources.
- Collaborating with stakeholders to develop and evaluate mitigation and adaptation solutions based on NBIFs.
- Developing a user-friendly web-based platform to provide stakeholders with access to project data, supporting decision-making and community engagement.
- Conducting outreach campaigns to increase community awareness about the resilience of groundwater resources in South Florida.   
   
By advancing the science and practice of NBIFs for climate resiliency of groundwater resource, the project aims to contribute to the adaptive planning and decision-making processes related to the implementation of NBIFs for sustainable groundwater management. This project aims to utilize the Gray 2 Green (G2G) decision support tool, which was funded by the US Forest Service (USFS), to facilitate the transition to a vegetation-based stormwater management initiative. The G2G project serves as a demonstration of the advantages of green infrastructure and the difficulties involved in retrofitting cities. It introduces the G2G planning tool as a means to effectively integrate green infrastructure in Tampa. While the G2G project clearly indicates the positive impact of green infrastructure on groundwater recharge in Tampa, it does not quantify the effects on saltwater intrusion mitigation, spring discharge increase, and submarine groundwater discharge due to the absence of surface-water groundwater. It is essential to incorporate these aspects to showcase the significance of green infrastructure in enhancing the climate resilience of groundwater resources in South Florida, as indicated by the support letters from SFWMD and USFS.
  
This project’s interdisciplinary team consists of six faculty members and one postdoctoral research at Florida Gulf Coast University (FGCU), Florida State University, and University of Florida. FGCU campus is near SFWMD, which is convenient to stakeholder participation.
