## A Model-Experiment (ModEx) Framework to Advance Understanding of Fertilizer and Pesticide Reactive Transport in Rural Agricultural Areas
Faulty member: Ahmed S. Elshall  
Funding: EPA-I-R4-SFL-2023-01; 2023 South Florida Program  

### Project Summary

This project is to develop a model-experiment (ModEx) framework to advance our
understanding on reactive transport of fertilizers and pesticides used in agricultural industry.
Florida’s $120 billion agriculture industry is important to the state economy, and south Florida is
an important agricultural area. Substantial uses of fertilizers and pesticides in south Florida have
posed threats to the environment and human health.
  
The study site of this project is Immokalee located in Collier County, FL., and its groundwater
system belongs to the Lower West Coast Floridan Aquifer System (LWCFAS). Immokalee is a rural
region, and three-quarters of the Immokalee community is employed in agriculture, most of
whom are immigrants from Mexico or Haiti or are African American. Immokalee was the
epicenter of a lawsuit (settled in 2008) against Ag-Mart Produce Inc., a substantial Florida-based
produce company, which was charged negligent use of pesticides that resulted in a cluster of
birth defects for so-called “Immokalee babies”.
  
The goal of the project is to develop the ModEx framework that integrates two EPA models
and field/lab experiments to investigate reactive transport of agricultural fertilizers and
pesticides in Immokalee groundwater basin and watershed. The two EPA models are the
Hydrologic and Water Quality System (HAWQS 2.0, released in 2023) and Pesticide in Water
Calculator (PWC, with the latest version released in 2022). One objective of this project is to
evaluate and improve the models by using literature, public domain, and site-specific data. Four
dye tracing experiments will be conducted at Immokalee to identify flow paths of fertilizer and
pesticide transport, and field and laboratory experiments will be designed along the flow paths
to collect site-specific data. To the best of our knowledge, dye tracing experiments have not been
conducted in Immokalee. This project’s overarching hypothesis is that the proposed ModEx
framework can simultaneously evaluate and improve HAWQS and PWC models by effectively and
efficiently using literature, public domain, and site specific data for sustainable environmental
management and for reduction of rural children’s health risk related to fertilizers and pesticides.
   
This project will closely collaborate with two centers that were funded by EPA in 2023. One
is the Bioecological Center for Rural Children’s Health (BeRCH) at Immokalee funded to the
Florida State University (FSU). BeRCH is a forward-thinking and environmental justice-based
center that focuses on identifying and mitigating the interactive cumulative health consequences
of pathological synergies amongst chemical and non-chemical stressors in children. Fertilizers
and pesticides are chemical stressors of concern to BeRCH, and ModEx results (data and models)
of this project will be used by BeRCH for understanding the dynamics of fertilizer and pesticide
transport at multiple scales. The other center is Resource for Assistance and Community
Training – Region 4 (REACT4EJ) funded by EPA to the Research Triangle Institute (FSU participates
as a member of the center). REACT4EJ will be a comprehensive training and technical assistance
center that provides program participants access to a combination of locally focused materials
on environmental justice topics and programs and trainings with broad applicability.
Collaborating with REACT4EJ will connect Immokalee communities with other community-based
organizations and state/local government agencies across EPA Region 4 to advance
environmental justice at Immokalee and other underserved communities.
  
This project’s interdisciplinary team consists of three faculty members and three students
(graduate and undergraduate) at FSU and Florida Gulf Coast University (FGCU), whose campus is
about 40 miles to Immokalee, convenient to data collection and community engagement.

For more information, visit our [EPA Fertilizers and Pesticides Project Website](https://atmos.eoas.fsu.edu/~mye/Pesticides.php)
