## A Three-Pillar Socio-Health-Environmental (TPSHE) Framework to Mitigate Cumulative Health Impacts and Environmental Health Disparities for Polluted Urban Lakes in Underserved Communities
Faculty member: Ahmed S. Elshall  
Funding: EPA-G2023-STAR-G1, Community-Based Research for Effective Programs, Policies, and Decisions to Mitigate Cumulative Health Impacts and Environmental Health Disparities in Underserved Communities

## Project Summary:
Urban lakes experience substantial interactions with people, and the lakes’ ecological and social services are of high value to urban populations. However, urban lakes are vulnerable, as they may receive significant quantities of pollution from diverse sources in highly populated urban areas. Polluted lakes pose threats to human health, well-being, and quality of life, and this is particularly the case in underserved communities. One example of such lakes is Lake Munson located in Leon County, Florida, which received municipal wastewater effluent from the City of Tallahassee (the Capital City of Florida, located upstream of the lake) between 1934 and 1984. These discharges, combined with ongoing stormwater runoff, resulted in over seven decades of harmful blue-green algae blooms. In addition, elevated contaminant concentrations were confirmed in lake sediment from commercial and industrial releases. Residents in proximity to the lake have reported a myriad of health issues, from respiratory and skin problems to suspected instances of more severe ailments such as cancer and neurological disorders.

We propose to use Lake Munson as a study site, in comparison with Lake Jackson (another lake in Leon County that receive a small amount of urban wastewater and runoff) for developing cutting-edge, multidisciplinary research that is practically applicable to other urban lakes. The project team is qualified as “new awardee”, because none of the investigators has received an EPA STAR grant.

**Objectives:** The goal of the project is to develop a three-pillar socio-health-environmental (TPSHE) framework for effective and efficient assessment of cumulative impacts of polluted lakes on environmental and human health in underserved communities. The overarching hypothesis of the project is that TPSHE can produce comprehensive and accurate cumulative impact assessment leading to shared scientific sense-making and sustainable policy changes. The project’s objectives are to: 
1. identify acute and chronic health outcomes,
2.  identify key chemical and non-chemical stressors to environmental and health problems related to urban lakes,
3. develop model-data integration approaches for the identification and to establish monitoring networks that are always unavailable in underserved communities, 
4. and develop community-driven lake watershed policy reform for eliminating environmental health disparities and revitalizing urban lakes and surrounding communities.

**Approaches:** The TPSHE framework will be based on social-health-environmental approaches for data collection, analysis, and modeling to advance our understanding of the dynamic interrelations among social and ecological factors. We specifically separate the ecological factors into health and environmental factors for accurate, effective, and efficient assessment of cumulative impacts of polluted lakes on environmental and human health in underserved communities.

**Expected Results (outputs/outcomes):** The outputs of the project include a new set of qualitative and quantitative data for health, environmental, and social issues related to polluted urban lakes, new socialhealth-environmental modeling approaches, identified health outcomes (chronic and acute) and sensors (chemical and non-chemical), and an initiative of community-driven lake policy reform. The outcomes of the project include advanced understanding on the links between stressors (chemical and non-chemical) and health outcomes (chronic and accurate), new practices and policies of monitoring urban water, and new practices of community engagement and mobilization for community-based solutions.

**Supplemental Keywords:*** urban lakes, harmful algae blooms, nutrient pollution, community-driven lake policy reform initiative, social-health-environmental modeling, transferable machine-learning models.
